# Drinks

## Teas

I have always been a friend of tea. Ever since I was a child we have always had
an abundance of tea at home which I enjoyed drinking. However I have also been
a sucker for sweet things, so my tea flavour usually consisted of 1% tea and
99% honey or sugar.

For the last couple of years things have changed. I went to university and I
couldn't cope with my sleeping hours anymore so I took up coffee for its
caffeine. Again I used insane amounts of sugar, especially so because coffee
and honey, yuck. Then came this one time when I tasted extremely strong coffee
without any sugar or milk after which I just couldn't put any sugar in coffee
anymore. After I realized I didn't really never enjoy the taste of coffee, I
took up tea again, this time properly. We bought a simple tea set consisting of
a teapot and couple of steeping balls. Later we expanded it by bying a small
strainer, this way the tea can expand all it wants.

Depending on the day I can enjoy any flavour of teas. One day I might enjoy a
cup (or 5) of basic unflavoured black tea, and on the next highly flavoured
white tea. Just like anyone who has fallen to the temptation of loose leaf, my
cupboard contains many different teas ranging from black to white, flavoured to
unflavoured. Especially during cold winters I enjoy a nice cup of black tea
with a bit of honey, [to keep cold
away](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Health_effects_of_honey).

### Black teas
[English Breakfast Tea](http://steepster.com/teas/twinings/490-english-breakfast).

 :    Black tea.  The first time we bought this was when we were on vacation in
Greece.  Considering the steeping equipment we had there, the taste was great.
Strong flavour When we came back to finland we bought loose leaf English
Breakfast Tea from Twinings. This is one of the two teas I keep at work, but
lately I haven't been able to get the flavour out of this. Maybe the leafs have
suffered from air as they aren't preserved stored properly.


Russian blend

 :   Black tea from either Nordqvist or Forsman, the original wrapping has been
 destroyed. This is a good basic flavoured tea with Assam tea as the base. Has
 a little tangy flavour.

Toffeetee (toffee tea)

 :    Flavoured black tea from Nordqvist I think. This tea was a
 dissapointment.  The label in the behind says that this is a good tea for when
 you want something sweet. As far as I'm concerned it is scented with toffee,
 but tastes like regular black tea. No sweetness in the flavour whatsoever.

Ruusutee (rose tea)

 :    Flavoured black tea from [Turun tee ja mauste](http://steepster.com/companies/turun-tee-ja-mauste). Probably also a
 Forsman tea. A tea flavoured with rose flowers. The rose flowers gives a nice
 sweet flavour. A good tea if you want something sweat. Definitely no honey
 with this one.

Hehkuva talvi (glowing winter)

 :    Flavoured black tea from [Turun tee ja mauste](http://steepster.com/companies/turun-tee-ja-mauste) by Formsan Tea.
 This is another flavoured tea that I like. The original wrapping has been
 destroyed so I don't know what the flavourings are, but they too give an
 extremely sweet taste. If you want something sweet, this is a good choice.

[Earl grey](http://steepster.com/teas/twinings/534-earl-grey-loose-leaf)

 :    Unflavoured black tea from Twinings. Another good basic unflavoured tea.
 I like to drink this with honey.

Assam

 :    Unflavoured black tea from [Turun tee ja mauste](http://steepster.com/teas/twinings/534-earl-grey-loose-leaf). Another
 basic black unflavoured black tea. It has a small anis like scent, which also
 gives a bit of tanginess to the flavour. Probably my favourite black tea.

### White teas
Valkoinen tiikeri (white tiger)

 :    Basic white tea from either Nordqvist or Forsman (we cannibalized the
 original packaging when we stored it in a tin can). I love it after learning
 how to steep white tea properly. Water temperature must be 85 degrees celcius
 or less, and steep for 2-3 minutes.

Ginger pearls

 :    Flavoured white tea from [Turun tee ja mauste](http://steepster.com/companies/turun-tee-ja-mauste). I'm not too
 impressed with this ginger flavoured white tea. The ginger flavour is too
 strong masking all of the white tea flavour. It also leaves some sort of
 floury after taste and/or texture to your mouth. The tea leaves are
 interesting looking after steeping them, sort of tentacle like.

### Green teas
Gun powder

 :    Unflavoured green tea from [Turun tee ja mauste](http://steepster.com/companies/turun-tee-ja-mauste). Basic green tea
 that has been rolled up. I like this tea. It has a nice strong leafy flavour
 with a smoky side.

Gun powder

 :    Unflavoured green tea from Twinings. Haven't found this in a while, but
 if my memory serves me correctly, this too has a nice strong leafy flavour,
 but doesn't have the smoky side in it.

Vihre√§ sitruuna-kamomilla (green lemon-camomille)

 :    Flavoured green tea from Forsman Tea. This my goto tea at work. It
 doesn't get bitter easily, probably because of the flavourings, and can be
 steeped multiple times. The taste begins as a sour tea, moving to a mellower
 flavour after each steeping.

### Other
Unknown pu-erh tea

 :    Unflavoured pu-erh tea from [Turun tee ja mauste](http://steepster.com/companies/turun-tee-ja-mauste). It's not in the
 normal cake form but loose leaf. The thing with pu-erh is that it's flavour is
 so unlike anything else that it takes some time to get used to. The first time
 I drank it I wasn't sure at all that I would like it. Now I crave it. If you
 have pu-erh available with good price, definitely try it. Try drinking at
  least a couple of cups of it before dissing it. I usually boil the water and
  steep for 1 minute.
