---
title: ICT Showroom and data validation
tags: java,web
---

The ICT showroom event was today at ICT building, Turku, Finland. It is an
event for students to show their projects and maybe even get some corporate
interest. Turku University of Applied Sciences has a programming course in
which they have to show their product at the ICT showroom event. My friend
and his group did an Elgamal encryption system with Java.

I don't know all the details about their project as it was the last stand I
went to. The system was made for educational purposes, with manual inserting of
prime number and other arguments. I think it was supposed to show different
stages of the encryption, at least another project a few years ago did.
They did however implement a network and serialization protocol which they
used to demonstrate with Wireshark.

I went to the stand 15 minutes before the end. They spent around five
minutes explaining the project, and then asked me to break it. Seems like
I've been loud enough to get some reputation around there :P. There was 10
minutes left before the event would end, and they hand me their manual and
network protocol. If I really had tried, I would have spent more time
reading the protocol than there was time left, therefore at first I wasn't
even going to try and break it.

As I was handing back out the document, one of them mentioned something
that made me think that they didn't properly validate their data. I didn't
really know what to try with such little time left but I figured that I
could take control of one of the laptops, start netcat and just hit the
keyboard. As they saw me taking the laptop, their eyes gleamed with
anticipation, wanting to see which would win, me or their software.

I inserted a few random keystrokes and one of them noticed the server
wasn't online. At this point I was already thinking that all the drama was
for nothing. They tried to put the server back on, but it kept popping up
some dialog, like in an infinite loop.

They closed the entire program and restarted it, making sure that the
server was up and listening for connections. I retried connecting netcat
and inserting random data and behold, the behaviour repeated itself. A
dialog starting in an infinite loop. We retried it a few more times, and I
was able to replicate it every single time.

I haven't seen their code since the very beginning when they asked me some
guidance for the user interface and therefore I have no idea what bug I
stumbled upon. I do know however that you should never trust the data
coming from world, even when it's your own protocol. You can only hope that
it's legitimate data from your server/client, but it could also be a geek
with netcat, or even some maleficent person wanting to do some real harm.
