---
title: Software testing course - Part I
tags: testing,ruby,school
---

Turku university is having a software testing course (ohjelmistotestaus) for
computer science students. This year the course is held by two employees of
Lindorff Oy, and as far as I understood this is the first time the course is
held like this. Their plan was to have two lectures, and four
[dojos](http://codingdojo.org/). Aside for those, we are supposed to keep a
learning diary or a blog, do a lecture on a subject for our groups and write a
proper text from our subject. As you might have guessed, I chose my format to
be a blog post.

There is no much point to say anything overtly detailed about the lectures, as
they were just some general information about testing in general. Their point
seems to be to take our mind of programmer-centric testing mindset to a proper
testing-centric mindset. I believe this is why emphasized that unit testing is
not testing (at least for this course).

## Dojo

I haven't been in any other dojos before so I'm not sure how they usually go. I
believe that as this was first and foremost a learning event, we had a minor
twist to it. Every single one of us had an expert subject we were supposed to
'master' and present and teach it to our home group. Two subjects are to be
taught per dojo, where the first two were
[ATDD](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Behavior_Driven_Development) and
[Cucumber](http://cukes.info). Cucumber was also my subject. I don't mind
reading a lot of theory and abstract stuff, but I believe I had grokked BDD as
well as I could, but what I wanted was hands-on experience with it.

There is about 20 of us and we are separated into two home groups. One of us,
the one who had studied the tool, is the technical expert. Other than that I
believe it's normal dojo, one sensei, two people, driver and copilot, on the
computer and rest are discussing on the side, without interfering with the two
people on the computer. The driver is 5 minutes on the computer, after which
the copilot takes the seat and the next person from the "buffer" becomes the
copilot.
