---
title: Driving lessons part one
tags: nontech
---

I began driving lessons a while back. Just like anything you try to learn from
the ground up requires time and effort. This post is my effort to try and take
the methods I have with programming to the 'real world'. With programmming I
often write blog posts about some exercise I've done, to rationalize my
solutions and to get back to them. This helps me seeing mistakes and the
process seems to stay better in my mind.

Usually when I start studying something new, I spend a little bit of time
beforehand to familiarize myself with the subject. Driving was one of the most
difficult subjects on this front, there was almost nothing available on the
internet, and I wasn't ready to spend 30€ for buying the same book I'd get from
free in the autumn. This is why I'm going to be a bit more thorough with my
descriptions here.

I am not a native English speaker and this domain is outside of my usual
domain, therefore I might use occasionally wrong terms.

I had my first driving lessons last Monday, after doing more than half of the
theory lessons, so quite late. Not that I'm in a hurry of course, especially as
this is an entirely new domain for me. The car we use is a new model of Opel
Astra. The school I'm in is [Autohallin
autokoulu](http://autohallinautokoulu.net/).

The first lessons consisted of the teacher showing the absolute basics. The
basics include how to set up yourself in the drivers seat, meaning seat
location, wheel location, mirrors and seatbelts, followed by how handbrake
works and how to start the car. I'm pretty much the same size as the teacher,
so there was little for me to do at this point, I just moved the seat a bit
forward and modified a bit the rear mirror.

To continue with the absolute basics, the teacher showed how to start moving
and how to change the gears. To start moving, you take off the handbrake and
use the normal brake. Then you press the clutch way down, during which
there is no connection between the engine and the wheels. At least that's my
understanding. It also allows you to change gears for the same reasons. More
knowledgeable people probably wince at this point, but it wasn't explained to
us. I wouldn't mind knowing the inner workings, but probably most of the
students don't care, and would anyway only hear "press clutch, change gears".

When the clutch is pressed, you can change gears. I gathered from the internet
that, in theory you could get going on a higher gear, but the right way I
think, is by starting with the first gear. At this point my right leg was
already on the throttle. The next thing to do is, to calmly raise the clutch.
At some point around the middle, you feel the car starting to vibrate and
hopefully move a little. This means that the cogs are starting to connect
with the engine and energy is moved to the wheels. The thing to note however is
that cars have a lot mass to get going, and this needs a lot of power. If you'd
just raise the clutch, the engine couldn't give all the power needed and would
stall. However a moving object is easier to keep in motion, so we start with
little and eventually the engine pulls us faster. At this point we can also
give a little bit of throttle, and after a 10-20 meters press clutch back down,
take off the throttle and change gears to second.

To stop, we press down the clutch and slowly and calmly press the brake. The
clutch is for the same reason as before, if the car isn't moving and the engine
is connected to the wheels, someone needs to give up. Either we start moving
(despite the brake) or the engine does. The engine is invariably the weaker of
the two so the engine stops moving. The brakes on a car are usually very
powerful, way more than the devices I'm used to. To prevent jerky braking, you
should calmly break and just before stopping, slightly depress the pedestal. To
start moving again, change the gears to one and start from the beginning.

There is not much to say about steering. It is a lot simpler than for example a
plane or a bicycle. The car and the ground are steady and you don't need to
worry about keeping balance. If you keep your eye far enough, it's easy to
drive straight and where you want the car to be. When turning the steering
wheel wants to straighten itself, which is only natural because objects tend to
keep going straight. Of course you should remember to set the turn signal
before turning, which by the way is a bit weird in the car. It has two modes,
the first one blinks three times and stops, and the other one, the proper one,
starts the signal and stops when the wheel has turned and returned to the
straight position.

The teacher showed me another thing which I was completely unaware of. I had
thought that if you let go of the throttle, the engine begins to brake. Which
is true, to a certain extent. Later on this seems obvious, but hey, you can't
think of everything. When you let go of the throttle, the RPM settles to a
certain speed. No matter what gear, the RPM is about the same, but the speed of
the car is different, because of different transmission rates. I haven't
verified the next claim yet, but this is how I see it. If you are going at a
speed greater than what the minimum rpm would provide and then lift the
throttle, the wheels, through transmission, tries to maintain the engine RPM
which uses energy through drag and what-else, and therefore the engine
"brakes". After reaching the minimum RPM, the engine is already in its natural
state and no longer brakes, but instead keeps the natural speed. Therefore if
you lift the throttle, the speed will slow down until a certain limit is
reached, at which time the speed is maintained, so it's perfectly acceptable to
take your foot off the throttle.

That's the theory, but how did I do? This was the first time for me when I was
on the drivers seat, so it was all brand new to me. I had absolutely no feeling
of the pedestals, and most definitely not an ounce of muscle memory. These two
I believe were the main reasons for the errors I made.

We did many runs of the start, stop sequence to try and create a little bit of
muscle memory, although I believe that proper muscle memory is reached only
after the entire class is over and might even take years. But it is enough to
get enough muscle memory to take your mind off the pedestal and onto the street
ahead of you and the traffic around you.

Steering the car was mostly okay, but as the wheel tends to straighten itself
when turning, I used that phenomenon to my advantage. Or disadvantage, as the
rate of turn slows as the car straightens, and the wheel sort of sticks to
hands especially if they're even a little bit of sweaty. This causes a bit of
jerky and unsteady turning behaviour. The teacher made me turn full left and
full right for a couple of times, and with that I realized that explicit
straightening is better than letting the car straighten itself. This was a good
way, because it made me myself come into the conclusion, instead of just saying
it. This I believe will stay in the back of my head for a long, long time.

The braking caused the most trouble. At first, I focused on how to brake and
therefore I braked calmly smoothly. At this point I didn't have any feeling for
the pedestals, I couldn't tell at all when the brake is going to brake and when
clutch is going to give power to the wheels, when the throttle is raising RPM
etc. I also had to search for the pedestals a little. The throttle is a bit
forward compared to the brake and clutch, so it was a bit difficult to find.
All this caused my actions to be quite slow and at some point, I began thinking
that it takes me way too long to stop after the teacher asks. I started to get
anxious of when the brakes going to brake, as at first nothing happens. After
pressing it a little and nothing happening, I pressed a bit more aggressively
and as the brakes as sensitive as it gets, my braking became extremely jerky.
This problem reared its head only with the last three times, so it wasn't too
bad.

The same problem affected throttling too, but it wasn't as apparent because the
clutch was still partly pressed and not all the power was transmitted to
wheels, but it could still be heard. The good thing is that the throttle didn't
have as much "empty space" as the brakes did.

One time when I accelerated, as I had no muscle memory, my legs got a bit mixed
up. At this point in time, I don't recall it entirely anymore, but I believe it
was caused by me pressing and releasing both throttle and clutch at the same
time, and then repeating it to the other direction, and repeating this for a
couple of times, causing the car to jerk a bit. The teacher did mention about
it, but it was apparent enough to me to notice it too.

In the field where we were driving is a darker area of pavement, which is about
a lanes width. This represents the lane we're driving, and provides a good
practice for steering and targeting when turning. It's generally easy to keep
on it as the car tends to drive itself, and if you keep your eyes far enough,
you automatically drive straight. You can try it with a bicycle, or by walking,
by watching a little ahead of your feet, compared to by watching the end of the
road. It is also easier than I thought to notice the width of the car, and
'seeing' how the car sits on the lane.

The teacher didn't mention it, but for a couple of times I noticed that instead
of the car sitting in the middle of the lane, it had veered a bit to the right.
I believe this is because as I'm sitting on the left side of the car, I
naturally tend to keep myself in the center of the lane. I believe this will
fix itself as time passes by and it becomes natural to sit on the left side of
the lane.

I was also a bit slow with the acceleration. I didn't have a good feel of the
clutch and the throttle, so it's understandable. I didn't dare to raise the
clutch further to give more power for the wheels. Or rather, my movements were
coarse.
